## What Is Bitcoin Mining?
You don't need to understand how Bitcoin mining works to use Bitcoin, but if you are interested in the details, what miners do and how bitcoin comes into existence, read on.

### Mining in Easy Words
Imagine you want to fill a museum with artwork made of jigsaw puzzles, where each puzzle will contribute to the visitor's experience. There are clear rules: only puzzles that are assembled correctly and have won a competition can be placed in the museum. You will select and give a reward to the child that finishes the most difficult puzzle first. You don't want the child to be able to cheat against others or know in advance which puzzle will win. Now you send 10,000 children all over the world the same jigsaw puzzle and they start putting it together piece by piece at the same time. The child who finishes putting together the pieces first wins the prize. They have proven that they put the work in and the completed puzzle is the proof.

The process of building the puzzle cannot be corrupted, wrong puzzle pieces cannot be inserted and the child who wins cannot be artificially selected. The fastest child wins the prize. These are the rules. You can only change the rules if the parents, the children, the puzzle designer and the museum - all participants in the puzzle's network - decide collectively to do so. Here, when we talk about the prize, we are metaphorically speaking about the creation of bitcoin.

That is more or less what proof-of-work is about. Thousands of computers worldwide solving mathematical riddles at the same time, showing that they put an amount of effort in and, at the same time, decentralizing the reward earnings so that no one can collude or predict which miner will be the next to add a block to the chain. The effort the miners put in to validate the transactions and form blocks not only proves their work but also secures the blockchain. You cannot change the past - historical transactions - in the Bitcoin blockchain without spending a lot of money on infrastructure and electricity to re-write the blockchain. That is why attacks on the Bitcoin network are possible in theory but are very, very expensive in reality.

### Mining in Detail

Imagine you're already using Bitcoin and have a Bitcoin wallet installed on your smartphone. You order a product on the internet, choosing bitcoin as payment. The site will show you its Bitcoin address and you will use your mobile wallet to send the required amount. Then the following happens:

Your wallet signs the transaction. It is then broadcast into the Bitcoin network and enters a pool of other unconfirmed transactions, which is called the Mempool. The payee receives your transaction and their full node validates the transaction. It still waits, however, for confirmation that the transaction has been successfully added to a block before determining finality. That is the moment when you see that your transaction has been sent in your wallet but is pending, meaning it's not yet finally settled on the blockchain. You have zero confirmations at this time.

At the same time, the miners receive your transaction in their node's Mempool as well. A Bitcoin miner is a specialized device called ASIC. Its only task is to run the hashing algorithm and solve the mining puzzle as fast as possible. There are hundreds of thousands of them, decentralized around the world.

The miners also have the full node software running which validates your transaction, checking that all the protocol rules were followed and that you, as the payer, have enough bitcoin to pay for the transaction. If the answer to these checks is yes, they add the transaction to their block template. But first of all, when they generate a new block template, the miner inserts the so-called coinbase transaction that, if they win the mining race, will pay them 6.25 bitcoin as a reward. After constructing the coinbase transaction, the computers select transactions from the Mempool and add them into the previously generated block template.

At the same time, the hashing computers (ASICs) are beginning to solve the mathematical puzzle. They compete with all other mining computers worldwide. The hasher that solves the puzzle first broadcasts the block to its peer nodes, who verify it and relay it to their peers, and so on until every node on the network has verified and stored the block. After 99 more blocks are added to the blockchain, the winning miner is allowed to spend the previously created subsidy of 6.25 bitcoin.

The payee, in fact, their full node, receives the block and validates it again and then finally confirms your transaction. Your payment is now attached to the chain in a data block and is completed. You receive a confirmation in your Bitcoin wallet that the payment has reached the recipient. You see in your wallet that your transaction has 1 confirmation. About every 10 minutes a new block is created and added after the block containing your transaction. After six blocks the transaction is considered to be practically irreversible.

The time span that your transaction needs to be settled depends on the transaction fee you are selecting and paying. The higher the fee, the faster the miners will insert your transaction in a block, because they earn these fees in addition to the block reward of 6.25 bitcoin.

Why this mathematical puzzle? Proof-of-work is resource-intensive as computers require large amounts of power. This fact leads to criticism of Bitcoin in light of the climate changes that we humans have created in recent decades. Chapter 3.1.11 "Bitcoin's Ecological Footprint" deals with this question in more detail.

Why do we need to use so much electricity? The answer is security and decentralization. The need to put effort and energy into mining protects the data in the blockchain from manipulation and makes it immutable and uncensorable. No state nor organization can change the blockchain.

Since its creation in 2009, the Bitcoin blockchain has never been hacked. Around 18.74 million bitcoin have created so far, currently worth over six hundred billion USD (June 2021). Whilst a successful hack of the Bitcoin network could result in the greatest value heist in human history, it would require at least 51% of Bitcoin mining power to be concentrated under one owner or conglomerate. This could allow a malicious party to generate new blocks faster than the other 49% of miners, meaning they could theoretically override the consensus. But such an attack cannot steal, redirect or spend bitcoin without signatures. The attackers could only try to double-spend their own bitcoin in the most recent blocks and cause denial-of-service disruptions on the creation of future blocks. 

Additionally, if an attack on Bitcoin were ever to succeed, then the Bitcoin blockchain would split as it has done several times before. Participants in the Bitcoin blockchain could opt to switch over to supporting the 'new' chain or continue to support the 'old' chain version. This split of versions due to inherent rules is known as a hard fork. The 2017 Bitcoin / Bitcoin Cash hard fork proved that this would not be detrimental to the legitimacy of the blockchain.

The second major function of mining is to ensure decentralization. On the one hand, to make money creation independent from central entities and human power-grabs such as central banks, and on the other hand to ensure that no miner can gain advantage and manipulate the blockchain. The calculation task is difficult and at the same time, as with a raffle, it is a matter of luck which computer finds a valid solution first. As a result, it is not possible to predict who the winning computer will be, which makes it impossible to influence the blockchain. If you don't know who will be first, you can't manipulate it and earn the reward.

If you are thinking about starting to use bitcoin, rest assured that the blockchain is secured by mining and distributed identically on thousands of different computers. It is very, very secure. Your most important task is to self-custody your bitcoin and keep the private keys (your password) secure.
