## Who Is Satoshi Nakamoto?

This puzzle may never be solved because there is no Satoshi Nakamoto. The name is a pseudonym. It could be an individual or a group of cryptographers, programmers and scientists. On August 18 2008, an unknown person registered the domain bitcoin.org. By registering the domain with the help of a company in Panama, the anonymity of the person is protected to this day.

On October 1 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto appeared on the "Cryptography Mailing List" and explained in a message that they had been working on an electronic cash system and posted the link to the Bitcoin white paper on [https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf).

Hal Finney, an American cryptography and computer expert, had long been involved in the concept of digital money. However, none of the previous solutions were technically or conceptually mature enough to be used widely. The news from Satoshi Nakamoto sounded so interesting that Hal Finney started communicating with Nakamoto. On January 8, 2009, Nakamoto released the first version of the Bitcoin software. Five days earlier, on January 3, 2009, Nakamoto mined the first public bitcoin block, the so-called Genesis Block. Since then, on January 3, Bitcoin's birthday has been celebrated. Hal Finney was the first after Nakamoto to install the software on his computer and receive a transaction. Hal Finney sadly died of a nerve disease sometime later. Did he know who was hiding behind the pseudonym, Satoshi Nakamoto?

Until April 26 2011, Nakamoto participated in discussions about the Bitcoin network - they answered questions from other developers, explained new features of the software, and outlined some motives behind it. The last message (possibly) left by Satoshi Nakamoto was in March 2014 when a report about the alleged identification of the Bitcoin "inventor" went through the media. In San Francisco, Newsweek magazine tracked down Dorian Satoshi Nakamoto, an American of Japanese descent. It was claimed that he was the brains behind Bitcoin. With "I am not Dorian Nakamoto", the alleged Satoshi Nakamoto announced that Dorian was not "the" Satoshi Nakamoto.
